_intros/section1.md, before:

---
title: Kexin Zhang
---
Welcome to my internet home! I'm a rising fourth year at [Georgia Tech](http://www.gatech.edu/){:target="_blank"}, majoring in industrial engineering, with a concentration in operations research, and minoring in computer science. My interests revolve around analytics (especially data vis!), data science, and software development.

I am currently interning at [Facebook](https://www.facebook.com/) and serving as the Director of Technology for [HackGT](https://hack.gt){:target="_blank"}. My past experience involves teaching C and assembly programming to Georgia Tech students as a teaching assistant for CS 2110 (Computer Organization and Programming), interning at [Wayfair](https://www.wayfair.com/){:target="_blank"} on the business intelligence infrastructure team, researching human behavior on social media in Georgia Tech's [comp.social lab](http://comp.social.gatech.edu/){:target="_blank"}, and doing full stack web development at fintech startup [Stackfolio](http://home.stackfolio.com/){:target="_blank"}.

Commit message:

auto update songs from spotify, modify intro wording, update resume

_intros/section1.md, after:

---
title: Kexin Zhang
---
I'm a rising fourth year at [Georgia Tech](http://www.gatech.edu/){:target="_blank"}, majoring in industrial engineering, with a concentration in operations research, and minoring in computer science. My interests revolve around analytics (especially data vis!), data science, and software development.

I am currently interning at [Facebook](https://www.facebook.com/) and serving as the Director of Technology for [HackGT](https://hack.gt){:target="_blank"}. My past experience involves teaching C and assembly programming to Georgia Tech students as a teaching assistant for CS 2110 (Computer Organization and Programming), interning at [Wayfair](https://www.wayfair.com/){:target="_blank"} on the business intelligence infrastructure team, researching human behavior on social media in Georgia Tech's [comp.social lab](http://comp.social.gatech.edu/){:target="_blank"}, and doing full stack web development at fintech startup [Stackfolio](http://home.stackfolio.com/){:target="_blank"}. 

I graduate from Georgia Tech in December 2018, and I'm currently seeking full time job opportunities.
